This quickstart will get you going with a Spring MVC Hibernate application that uses a Postgres database service, deployed to Heroku.

{.note}
Sample code for the [demo application](https://github.com/heroku/devcenter-spring-mvc-hibernate) is available on GitHub. Edits and enhancements are welcome. Just fork the repository, make your changes and send us a pull request.

## Prerequisites

* Java, Maven, Git, and the Heroku client (as described in the [basic Java quickstart](java))
* An installed version of [Postgres](http://www.postgresql.org/) to test locally

## Create a Java app that uses Spring MVC and Hibernate

If you don't already have a Spring MVC Hibernate app, the easiest way to create one is with Spring Roo. Spring Roo is a RAD tool that lets you quickly build Spring MVC applications with a complete model, view and controller layer, including relational database integration.

### Option 1. Clone the sample app

If you don't want to install Spring Roo, you can clone the sample app:

    :::term
    $ git clone https://github.com/heroku/devcenter-spring-mvc-hibernate.git 
    Cloning into petclinic...
    remote: Counting objects: 205, done.
    remote: Compressing objects: 100% (100/100), done.
    remote: Total 205 (delta 93), reused 205 (delta 93)
    Receiving objects: 100% (205/205), 98.55 KiB, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (93/93), done.

This will check out the completed app. To step back to the starting point, do:

    :::term
    $ git revert starting-point

Now you can skip forward to "Modify Database Configuration".

### Option 2. Create the app using Spring Roo

[Install Spring Roo](http://www.springsource.com/download/community?project=Spring%20Roo) if you don't already have it. Then create a directory for your app and generate the app using the `clinic.roo` script:

    :::term
    $ mkdir petclinic && cd petclinic
    $ roo script --file clinic.roo
        ____  ____  ____  
       / __ \/ __ \/ __ \ 
      / /_/ / / / / / / / 
     / _, _/ /_/ / /_/ /  
    /_/ |_|\____/\____/    1.1.4.RELEASE [rev f787ce7]


    Welcome to Spring Roo. For assistance press TAB or type "hint" then hit ENTER.
    project --topLevelPackage com.springsource.petclinic
    Created ROOT/pom.xml
    Created SRC_MAIN_JAVA
    Created SRC_MAIN_RESOURCES
    ...
    Updated SRC_MAIN_RESOURCES/log4j.properties
    Script required 41 second(s) to execute
    
By default, the generated app sets up the Hypersonic in-memory database. However, it is strongly recommended to use the same database locally as in production. So we will switch the application over to using Postgres with this Roo command:

    :::term
    $ roo persistence setup --provider HIBERNATE --database POSTGRES
    ...
    Updated SRC_MAIN_RESOURCES/META-INF/spring/database.properties
    Please update your database details in src/main/resources/META-INF/spring/database.properties.
    Updated ROOT/pom.xml [removed dependency org.hsqldb:hsqldb:1.8.0.10; added dependency postgresql:postgresql:8.4-702.jdbc3]
    Updated SRC_MAIN_RESOURCES/META-INF/spring/applicationContext.xml
    Updated SRC_MAIN_RESOURCES/META-INF/persistence.xml
    ...

Finally, let's create a git repo and commit this baseline of our application:

    :::term
    $ git init
    $ echo target > .gitignore
    $ git add .
    $ git commit -m init
    
## Modify database configuration

The web app generated by Spring Roo expects you to set database connection properties in the file `src/main/resources/META-INF/spring/database.properties`. However, it is not a good idea to hardcode database configuration into a file that is part of your project. Instead, we will edit the Spring configuration to read the configuration from an environment variable.

Heroku automatically provisions a small database when you create a Java application and sets the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable to a URL of the format

    postgres://user:password@hostname:port/dbname

You can also provision a larger database service yourself using the `heroku addons` command. Either way, the database connection information will be stored in the `DATABASE_URL` variable.

Create a new URI spring bean initialized with this environment variable by adding this to `src/main/resources/META-INF/spring/applicationContext.xml`:

    :::xml
    <bean class="java.net.URI" id="dbUrl">
        <constructor-arg value="${DATABASE_URL}"/>
    </bean>

Edit the `dataSource` section in `src/main/resources/META-INF/spring/applicationContext.xml` and replace the property place holders with the following:

    :::xml
    <bean class="org.apache.commons.dbcp.BasicDataSource" destroy-method="close" id="dataSource">
        <property name="driverClassName" value="${database.driverClassName}"/>
        <property name="url" value="#{ 'jdbc:postgresql://' + @dbUrl.getHost() + @dbUrl.getPath() }"/>
        <property name="username" value="#{ @dbUrl.getUserInfo().split(':')[0] }"/>
        <property name="password" value="#{ @dbUrl.getUserInfo().split(':')[1] }"/>
        ...

To run your app locally set the DATABASE_URL variable in your local environment to point to your local postgres database, for example:

    :::term
    $ export DATABASE_URL=postgres://scott:tiger@localhost/myapp

## Add Jetty Runner

Jetty Runner lets you easily execute your web app as a standard Java application (without having to deploy it to a container). It's a simple jar that you can copy down from the central Maven repository to the target directory as part of you build. We'll use the `maven-dependency-plugin` to do this by adding the following plugin configuration at the end of the `plugins` section of `pom.xml`:

    :::xml
    <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>2.3</version>
        <executions>
            <execution>
                <phase>package</phase>
                <goals><goal>copy</goal></goals>
                <configuration>
                    <artifactItems>
                        <artifactItem>
                            <groupId>org.mortbay.jetty</groupId>
                            <artifactId>jetty-runner</artifactId>
                            <version>7.4.5.v20110725</version>
                            <destFileName>jetty-runner.jar</destFileName>
                        </artifactItem>
                    </artifactItems>
                </configuration>
            </execution>
        </executions>
    </plugin>

## Declare process types with Procfile

You declare how you want your application executed in `Procfile` in the project root. Create this file with a single line:

    :::term
    web: java $JAVA_OPTS -jar target/dependency/jetty-runner.jar --port $PORT target/*.war

## Optionally Choose a JDK
By default, OpenJDK 1.6 is installed with your app. However, you can choose to use a newer JDK by specifying `java.runtime.version=1.7` in the `system.properties` file.

Here's what a `system.properties` file looks like:

    :::term
    java.runtime.version=1.7

You can specify 1.6, 1.7, or 1.8 (1.8 is in beta) for Java 6, 7, or 8 (with lambdas), respectively.

## Run your app locally

Let's run the app locally first to test that it all works. You must have a Postgres database up and running and accessible on the `DATABASE_URL` you specified above.

### Build your app

    :::term
    $ mvn package
    [INFO] Scanning for projects...
    [INFO]                                                                         
    [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [INFO] Building petclinic 0.1.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT
    [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [INFO] 
    ...
    [INFO] --- maven-dependency-plugin:2.3:copy (default) @ petclinic ---
    [INFO] Configured Artifact: org.mortbay.jetty:jetty-runner:7.4.5.v20110725:jar
    [INFO] Copying jetty-runner-7.4.5.v20110725.jar to /Users/jjoergensen/dev/tmp/spring-roo-petclinic/target/dependency/jetty-runner.jar
    [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
    [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [INFO] Total time: 20.466s
    [INFO] Finished at: Mon Aug 29 20:56:03 PDT 2011
    [INFO] Final Memory: 9M/81M
    [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Start your app

<div class="callout" markdown="1">
Note: you can also start your app using foreman to execute the Procfile. [Read more about foreman and procfiles](http://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/procfile).
</div>

    :::term
    $ java -jar target/dependency/jetty-runner.jar target/*.war

### Test it

Go to <http://localhost:8080> and test it out by creating a new record.

## Deploy to Heroku

Commit your changes to Git:

    :::term
    $ git add .
    $ git commit -m "Ready to deploy"

Create the app:

    :::term
    $ heroku create
    Creating high-lightning-129... done, stack is cedar
    http://high-lightning-129.herokuapp.com/ | git@heroku.com:high-lightning-129.git
    Git remote heroku added

Deploy your code:

    :::term
    $ git push heroku master
    Counting objects: 227, done.
    Delta compression using up to 4 threads.
    Compressing objects: 100% (117/117), done.
    Writing objects: 100% (227/227), 101.06 KiB, done.
    Total 227 (delta 99), reused 220 (delta 98)

    -----> Heroku receiving push
    -----> Java app detected
    -----> Installing Maven 3.0.3..... done
    -----> Installing settings.xml..... done
    -----> executing .maven/bin/mvn -B -Duser.home=/tmp/build_1jems2so86ck4 -s .m2/settings.xml -DskipTests=true clean install
           [INFO] Scanning for projects...
           [INFO]                                                                         
           [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
           [INFO] Building petclinic 0.1.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT
           [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
           ...
           [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
           [INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
           [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
           [INFO] Total time: 36.612s
           [INFO] Finished at: Tue Aug 30 04:03:02 UTC 2011
           [INFO] Final Memory: 19M/287M
           [INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    -----> Discovering process types
           Procfile declares types -> web
    -----> Compiled slug size is 62.7MB
    -----> Launching... done, v5
           http://pure-window-800.herokuapp.com deployed to Heroku

Congratulations! Your web app should now be up and running on Heroku. Open it in your browser with:

    :::term  
    $ heroku open
